# General KPI/Metrics issue

Defining KPIs and metrics to evaluate the performance of security and privacy teams is not easy, and there is no unified solution that can be used across multiple companies. It all depends on the maturity of the company in terms of security posture and adoption of different security controls, the size of the company, and the number/size/duties of security and privacy teams. To measure performance, teams must be responsible for specific areas that are measured and must have the authority to enforce some processes and policy implementation. It is hard to define KPI if teams do not have enough authority or cover too wide area. For example, if the company is mature, has a high-security posture, and has a good security culture, has different dedicated security and privacy teams like SOC, DevSecOps engineers, privacy office, GRC unit, etc., will have more granular and specific KPI per team. However, if the company has a low-security culture, low adoption of security solutions, and, for example, one small team that covers all security and privacy and does not have enough authority, strict metrics/KPIs should be avoided.

The problem with different metrics and KPIs for security teams is that, in many cases, they do not directly impact the end results. For example, the number of breaches can depend on how business teams use and share access to the systems and data, how engineering defines the infrastructure and implements defined controls, how developers use defined controls in the product lifecycle, and how they implement them in their code. However, it is still very important to gather different metrics in the context of the whole company and different systems to evaluate the security team's direction and the impact they have.

The best approach in most cases is to define metrics that help assess security and privacy posture and the implementation of different controls. Those should be used to identify company direction and, if provided solutions, improve posture and reduce risks. Metrics can be used to identify the company's maturity level, which should grow with time. Using widely accepted frameworks and maturity levels is also a good approach, as it gives some direction recognized by industry leaders. Those (metrics, frameworks, maturity levels) should be used to evaluate if security and privacy have improved or not.

As for the security team performance, setting goals to improve specific areas and keep them on specific maturity levels is a better approach than randomly selected KPIs. Generally, it is advised to use a goals approach like OKRs instead of general KPIs in the context of security teams. With higher maturity and multiple specialized security teams, assigning them responsibility for keeping specific KPI and metrics high is possible. However, it requires a good security culture and enough freedom and authority for security teams.

# Different perspective

## Strategy perspective

One of the key questions for each department is how they contribute to general company strategy. Understanding company direction and how security fits into it is very important not only for security teams but for the whole company. Good strategy alignment is crucial to ensuring a budget for security teams. It can be hard to identify specific metrics or KPIs that prove that, but defining security strategy and strategic goals well aligned and presented in the context of company strategy can help a lot. Then, KPIs and metrics can focus on tracking results for those goals. For example, if the company strategy for next 5 years is to be active in  6 new regions, privacy and security goals should be to ensure compliance with local legislation and secure systems against unique local threats and risks. Then, KPI can be coverage of a specific number of critical legislation requirements or mitigate a specific number of high and critical threats. The general idea would be to track the impact on the company, strategy alignment, and goal progression.

## Compliance perspective

More mature companies see security investments, and less mature see security as a necessary evil - a requirement in the context of compliance. However we look at this, compliance is one of the responsibilities of privacy and security teams. Each company operates in at least one market, which has multiple regulations on data privacy, financial data (bookkeeping), AI usage, etc. If a company operates in multiple markets, it becomes even more complex as some regulations can exclude each other and be in opposition. The legal landscape is becoming more and more complex, and as identified in research (for example, WEF Cybersecurity Outlook), it is becoming a pain point for security and privacy teams. However, as a very important part of security in the privacy area, it should be somehow measured. A good idea would be to track the level of compliance with legal requirements and standards. Some maturity levels or frameworks can help with that, so tracking, for example, maturity level, can be a good idea. Another option is to list all requirements and track what is fulfilled and what is not directly, but the mentioned frameworks and maturity levels often provide some mappings for different legal documents. Another option is to follow audit results and define metrics and KPIs based on the audit and identified shortcomings. Also, specific regulations may present metrics that should be tracked.

## Operational perspective

Looking outside the goals that are set for the security and privacy teams, there is an aspect of daily operation and its efficiency. By defining operational metrics, we verify whether core processes are running smoothly and implemented solutions are efficient. As the operation aspect covers many different things like system monitoring, vulnerability identification and patching, privacy issues identification, and solving, etc., it will really depend on the size of the security/privacy department and the maturity of the company. With mature security teams that cover different areas, it can be easier to define specific KPIs and metrics like mean time to patch critical vulnerabilities, Mean time to contain, Pentest executed in a month, etc. In less mature organizations with small teams or without a dedicated security/privacy team, it can be hard to reach the selected KPI as responsibility is blurred and there is not enough manpower to cover all. However, it is still worth selecting some operational metrics, even for small teams. The consistent tracking of these metrics results in immediate improvements in system health and user safety.

## Client perspective

Client perspective is something that is sometimes overlooked but is very important. The question would be, "What clients?". We have internal clients for security teams - developers, business teams, etc. We probably have our company partners (for example, vendors who provide products to our online shop). We have end users of our company products (can be webshop clients, can be passengers in the plane, etc.). Each group wants to protect some specific data, and the security and privacy team should consider all of them as the team's clients. Looking at KPIs and metrcis it is good to look from their perspective - what is important for the client and how we can ensure that we provide it. For example, webshop customers want to protect her/his privacy - personal data but also communication with customer support, order history, etc. In such cases, we can think of KPIs connected with data lifecycle and data access. For example, ensuring that user data is accessed only to send orders or only if there is a question about a specific order from a client, we can track the number of access to user data outside the customer support team and set KPI to ensure we have 0 of such cases.

## Risk perspective

If we would like to define the purpose of privacy and security teams in one sentence, we would say, "Privacy and security teams exist to ensure legal compliance and minimize security/privacy risks". Risk should be a key factor that determines priorities and focus for security and privacy teams. So, using the risk perspective in the KPI and defining metrics would be important. We can think about different high-level KPIs, like having risk assessments and threat models for all systems/services (or even features), and mitigate all critical issues. Very generally, we should try to identify how our assets are vulnerable and how they change over time. We can track the number of CVEs fixed; we can calculate some aggregated scores for the systems and even the whole company. We can count critical and high-severity issues. We can even try to calculate shared Risk costs based on the assets and impact of vulnerabilities. It all depends on company maturity, controls already implemented, and the quality of threat models and risk assessments.

## Finance perspective

One of the aspects of any team is their costs. Cost of hiring people, cost of tools they used. If we are talking about privacy and security teams, there is a cost associated with the risk. Any measurements taken to minimize risk should be smaller than the financial impact of the vulnerability. There are costs of cyber insurance that can be minimized by implementing different controls and providing a higher maturity level. Very generally, KPIs can also include different financial aspects of security. There is, for example, the possibility of tracking the costs of controls vs the cost associated with the risk that those controls mitigate, which provides financial efficiency that can be tracked. It is advised to use such KPIs only in highly mature companies with very specialized teams that are able to not only track those correctly but also optimize solutions from a cost perspective and only if other departments (like development and engineering) already use similar KPIs.

## Posture/maturity perspective

There are many ways to identify security/privacy posture and identify company maturity level. The company can get through an external assessment, for example, during the certification process, audit process, or just on request. There are also free open-source standards that external assessment companies use, and companies can try to use them on their own. Such maturity frameworks with general security and privacy frameworks are very useful and are used widely. They can help identify priorities and define strategies for security/privacy teams. KPIs and metrics can be based on those frameworks or even be directly related to the expected maturity levels that we want to achieve. For example, KPIs can be used to reach 1 level of SAMM for the whole company (all services/systems) or something like to get and sustain SOC2 certification. Another approach would be to define KPIs based on the maturity model; for example, SAMM provides detailed information on what is required on a specific level of each stream, selecting those and changing it to the metric of coverage like 0 breaches of SLA on fixing high severity issues identified by SAST through all systems in the company.

# Example Metrics

As mentioned above, strict KPIs can be defined only if the company is mature and has specialized security/privacy teams. For less mature companies with smaller teams, keeping strict KPIs is counterproductive and not a good idea. In both cases, the best approach is to use the goals approach and track how close we get to our goals. Metrics should be used at the company level and are good indicators of the direction in which the company is going. As the company should identify the key metrics for itself, here is the list of metrics that you can find in different companies: number of security incidents, time between incidents (average), mean time to detect (MTTD), mean time to acknowledge (MTTA), mean time to contain (MTTC), mean time to resolve (MTTR), mean time to recover (MTTR), number of privacy complaints (customer, regulator), response time to data subject requests, timely privacy impact sssessment (PIA) completion rate, on-time regulator notification for privacy breaches, the number of unauthorized access attempts and successful breaches, the completion of security awareness training among your workforce, the time it takes to apply security patches and updates to systems and software, number of improvements identified, number of nonconformities identified, number of management reviews performed, financial losses due to data breaches, costs per incident, SLA breaches on fixing high/mid severity issues, different numbers based on audits results, etc.